Adding Cluster API doc entry (#1291)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/general/architcture/openstack/index.md

---
linkTitle: Openstack
title: The Giant Swarm Openstack architecture
description: Architecture overview showing how Giant Swarm is set up within a customer data center on Open stack deployment, using cluster API.
weight: 30
menu:
  main:
    parent: general-architecture
last_review_date: 2022-02-02
user_questions:
  - Do you run Openstack?
aliases:
  - /basics/openstack-architecture/
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-rocket
---

> # MC bootstraping

Reviewer: The main headline should be removed, as it is now part of the template and populated from the `title` front matter field.

Giant Swarm's architecture is split into two logical parts. One comprehends the management cluster and all the components running there which enhance the user experience when it comes to manage clusters and applications. On the other side we have the workload clusters that are created dynamically by the users and they serve to run their business workloads. In principle the management cluster and workload cluster are the equal in terms of infrastructure and configuration. The difference comes with the additional layers on top that help to manage your user and permissions, the workload clusters or the applications running on those clusters.

## Cluster Architecture

As explained previously, both management cluster and workload cluster has the same cluster structure and configuration. In Giant Swarm we rely on [Cluster API]() to bootstrap and configure the cluster infrastructure and set up all the components needed for a cluster to function. 

> [Cluster Architecture Image]()!

Reviewer 2: Image-link is missing.

By default the machines are split in three different failure domains or zones to ensure availability in the API and workloads. 

There is a machine created as bastion that help us with the operations. It is the single entrypoint to the running infrastructure so that way all cluster machines can live in a private network and expose the services running on them via explicit configuration.

> The setup requires a external network configured in the project to allow the machines to pull images or route requests from containers to Internet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The setup requires an external network configured in the project to allow the machines to pull images or route requests from containers to Internet.
```

#### Cluster OpenStack controller

A part of the generic controllers we have an special one that act as a bridge and reconcile the provider specific configuration to create the necessary infrastructure for a Kubernetes cluster. This controller provision, update and delete all resources on the provider API.

#### Cluster apps operator

This simple operator takes care of the default apps has to be created for a cluster and the right configuration that need to be created. Assets like the certificate authority or the domain base are provided by it via a configmap.

## Giant Swarm on-premises workload cluster(s)

### Components

#### Cloud Provider OpenStack

> This is the controller that is deployed inside all OpenStack clusters in order to provide Kubernetes integration. It listen to services and ingresses to provide load balancers dynamically for the workload clusters. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the controller that is deployed inside all OpenStack clusters in order to provide Kubernetes integration. It listen to services and ingresses to provide load balancers dynamically for the workload clusters. It also enriches Kubernetes node info with infrastructure relevant information. This is helpful for application administrators to implement affinity/ anti-affinity rules which reflect underlying availability zone infos. It's also mandatory for the Cluster API provisioning workflow to get known infrastructure specific machine infos.
```

Reviewer 2: And i would also recomment to add `CSI` in this list and then describe the openstack integration.

#### Kube State Metrics

> kube-state-metrics (KSM) is a simple service that listens to the Kubernetes API server and generates metrics about the state of the objects. (See examples in the Metrics section below.) It is not focused on the health of the individual Kubernetes components, but rather on the health of the various objects inside, such as deployments, nodes and pods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
kube-state-metrics (KSM) is a simple service that listens to the Kubernetes API server and generates metrics about the state of the objects (see examples in the Metrics section below). It does not focus on the health of the individual Kubernetes components, but rather on the health of the various objects inside, such as deployments, nodes and pods.
```

> #### Cilium

Reviewer 2: Maybe naming the topic `CNI` in general and than describing cilium as our CNI of choice - WDYT?

> Cilium is open source software for providing and transparently network connectivity in Kubernetes clusters. Cilium operates at Layer 3/4 to provide traditional networking and security services. Additionally it protects and secure applications offering different enhanced features on top. In the workload cluster is used as container network only.

Reviewer 3: Cilium is open source software for **providing and transparently network connectivity in Kubernetes clusters**. 
Something is weird with the syntax of this sentence and I can't figure it out. I don't want to make a suggestion, as I think I will totally miss the original meaning.

#### Cert exporter

> It is a Prometheus exporter that exposes a set of metrics regarding certificates and tokens so we can be aware in case any of those expire.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is a Prometheus exporter that exposes a set of metrics regarding certificates and tokens. It enables us to stay ahead of certificates expiration and take care of them in a timely fashion..
```

#### Net exporter

> Net exporter is a Prometheus exporter for exposing network information in that runs as daemon set in every node and track network and DNS errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Net exporter is a Prometheus exporter for exposing network information. It that runs as a daemon set in every node and tracks network and DNS errors.
```

#### Metric server

Metrics Server is a component that implements the [Kubernetes Metrics API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/resource-metrics-pipeline/#metrics-api) to provide basic data of the container running in the cluster.

#### Node exporter

It is a Prometheus exporter for hardware and OS metrics exposed by *NIX kernels.

## Workload segregation and account model

> When starting out with our platform many of our customers are at the beginning of their journey to a distributed and highly resilient micro-service architecture. This is often a radically different approach to organizing and managing computing resources. This is mostly about abstracting the complexity of cluster creation and management. It opens up new possibilities on how to isolate applications and access to the infrastructure. The two most common reasons for customers to segregate applications over different clusters and/or accounts are security and separation of concerns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When starting out with our platform many of our customers are at the beginning of their journey to a distributed and highly resilient micro-service architecture. This is often a radically different approach to organizing and managing computing resources than the one used in the past. It is mostly about abstracting the complexity of cluster creation and management. It opens up new possibilities on isolating applications and gaining access to the infrastructure. The two most common reasons for customers to segregate applications over different clusters and/or accounts are security and separation of concerns.
```

> Once Kubernetes arrived on the scene, the promise of having all your applications in a single cluster seemed invaluable, as container isolation, namespaces, and other Kubernetes features allow you to isolate the workloads. But as time passed several drawbacks were found that discourage this approach. Container isolation is not perfect, in the end workloads still share a kernel and some cluster components that can affect each other. Though it can be mitigated using Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), Network Policies or Pod Security Policies, it requires expertise and knowledge. At the same time, as you continue to add more and more applications into the cluster, the traffic increases. This potentially affects DNS latency, ingress handling, or the attack surface. In addition, having multiple tenants in the cluster increases the possibility to affect each other when a central component is tuned for a specific scenario. Potentially, it can significantly impact the cluster lifecycle, i.e. upgrades, due to the extra effort in communication and planning across various teams.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once Kubernetes arrived on the scene, the promise of having all your applications in a single cluster seemed invaluable, as container isolation, namespaces, and other Kubernetes features allow you to isolate the workloads. But as time passed several drawbacks were found that discourage this approach. Container isolation is not perfect, in the end workloads still share a kernel and some cluster components that can affect each other. Though it can be mitigated using Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), Network Policies or Pod Security standards (and the Pod Security Policies they are replacing), it requires expertise and knowledge. At the same time, as you continue to add more and more applications into the cluster, the traffic increases. This potentially affects DNS latency, ingress handling, or the attack surface. In addition, having multiple tenants in the cluster increases the possibility to affect each other when a central component is tuned for a specific scenario. Potentially, it can significantly impact the cluster lifecycle, i.e. upgrades, due to the extra effort in communication and planning across various teams.
```

All of this is not to say that segregation inside a cluster should be avoided but to emphasize that there are considerations that need to be weighed, before deciding on how to group tenants, applications and technical requirements.

Hence, the key is to find the right balance between the new Cloud Native approach and the old school hard isolation.

> Above, we see several isolation layers in one place. Our automation creates a single VPC by cluster, with private subnets for the worker nodes and secure configuration by default. At the same time, the nodes run a container-ready operating system created with security and reliability in mind. Next, our base Kubernetes setup provides [Network Polices](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/) and [Pod Security Policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/) to restrict communication to core components accompanying with a very strict policy to ensure containers do not gain extended privileges unintentionally.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph confuses me, since I don't find the link between the isolation layer with the rest of the paragraph.
Since the syntax is a little funky I'm wondering how to make this more readable.

> Having said that, there is no general rule to split workloads between AWS accounts, clusters or namespaces. It highly depends on the customers policies in effect and access requirements among others. However, we can give some advice on where to start.

Reviewer 3: AWS??

- Divide different services of single systems into different [namespaces](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/). It allows to control resources, network communication and access to those in finer granularity.
- Automate and abstract your workload lifecycle. Defining the configuration of applications and the underlying [infrastructure as code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_as_code) has become the de facto standard to manage complex systems. There are plenty of tools nowadays to declare your application configuration as code, rely on them and discard manual changes. Think about the possibility of having to migrate your application from one cluster to another. Ideally, such a change should imply just a single config line change. Kubernetes helps to define [Cloud Native Applications](https://12factor.net/) but there are some parts that still reside on the developer side.

> 

Reviewer 3: There is a lot of talk about AWS here. I think it may be some sort of glitch.

### Worker node size

> When it comes to sizing your worker nodes, there should generally be a preference for more, smaller nodes vs less, bigger ones. However, avoid node sizes of less than 4 cores and 8 GB RAM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When it comes to sizing your worker nodes, there should generally be a preference for more, smaller nodes vs bigger ones. However, avoid node sizes of less than 4 cores and 8 GB RAM.
```

To determine the right sizing in terms of cores and RAM, you need to know what kind of workloads will be run on the cluster and how much resources they need. Note that even if average load might be low, you should also account for peak load times as well as startup-peaks (i.e. some apps need a lot of resources just for their startup).

## Control resource assignment

> One of the golden rules of Kubernetes is proper resource assignment. This is hard to do, especially for developers which are not used to profiling their applications under different scenarios. But the resource definition is a [key configuration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/) part that allows Kubernetes to schedule, limit, control and scale the applications. So our recommendation [is to define resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/) for most of your applications running in the clusters. That said, there is some controversy about defining CPU limits due to how Kernels manage the CPU quota assigned to the containers. There have been some fixes in the latest Kernel versions which improve the situation. To learn more, we encourage you to [check this Kubecon video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UE7QX98-kO0) or talk to your Account Engineer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One of the golden rules of Kubernetes is proper resource assignment. This is hard to do, especially for developers who are not used to profiling their applications under different scenarios. Regardless, the [resource definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/) is a key configuration part that allows Kubernetes to schedule, limit, control and scale the applications. So our recommendation [is to define resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/) for most of your applications running in the clusters. That said, there is some controversy about defining CPU limits due to how Kernels manage the CPU quota assigned to the containers. There have been fixes in the latest Kernel versions which improve the situation. To learn more, we encourage you to [check this Kubecon video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UE7QX98-kO0) or talk to your Account Engineer.
```

> Further, to enforce the definition of resources, [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) helps to set the defaults once a user forgets to add those. At the same time, [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) enables cluster operators to assign a predetermined amount of resources to each namespace. Thus, protecting other workloads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Further, to enforce the definition of resources, [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) helps set the defaults if a user forgets to add those. At the same time, [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) enables cluster operators to assign a predetermined amount of resources to each namespace. Thus, protecting other workloads.
```

> Further, to enforce the definition of resources, [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) helps set the defaults if a user forgets to add those. At the same time, [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) enables cluster operators to assign a predetermined amount of resources to each namespace. Thus, protecting other workloads.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Furthermore, to enforce the definition of resources, [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) helps set the defaults if a user forgets to add those. At the same time, [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) enable cluster operators to assign a predetermined amount of resources to each namespace, thus, protecting other workloads.
```

## Secure your workloads

Within the cluster, Giant Swarm has set up a secure baseline using [Pod Security Policies (PSPs)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/) and [Network Policies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/). Pod Security Policies are the Kubernetes resource that configures the sensitive aspects of your applications. By default, users and workloads running in Giant Swarm clusters, are assigned a restrictive policy that disallows running containers as root or mounting host path volumes (these are just two examples). Cluster operators must enable applications to have higher security privileges on a case by case basis. In the aforementioned [guide]({{< relref "/getting-started/rbac-and-psp#pod-security-policies" >}}) we also explain how to configure tailored PSPs for you applications.

> 

Reviewer 3: Do you want to mention that we will be addressing the sunset of PSPs and the advent of PSSs instead?

## Observability

Since we provide a **managed** Kubernetes platform, Giant Swarm has to be aware of state and unexpected events regarding the platform. For that reason our management clusters run a [monitoring stack](https://www.giantswarm.io/blog/monitoring-on-demand-kubernetes-clusters-with-prometheus) to watch all workload clusters and ensure all managed components are healthy. In each workload cluster there are several [exporters](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exporters/) that gather and forward the metrics for each component.

Our on-call engineers will be paged in case anything happens to the cluster or its base components and they will respond to the incident based on the run-books we have created based on years of operating Cloud Native systems. In case there is an improvement to be made, a post mortem is created and a solution will be implemented before long. Any patch or fix added to the platform will be released to all customers.

> Please note, while this document went into extensive details with regards to how Giant Swarm runs Kubernetes on AWS, we support [Azure]({{< relref "/general/architecture/azure" >}}) as well as [Bare Metal]({{< relref "/general/architecture/on-premises" >}}). For more details, please [contact us](https://www.giantswarm.io/contact).

Reviewer 3: This is very outdated and does not address OpenStack at all.
I guess it needs to be rewritten and get rid of the bare metal piece. 
This link: should probably be removed, noted as deprecated with the addition of what we are planning for on-prem, which is **not** KVM.
